---
title: Understanding Turitin
---
The following is the text of an explanation that I gave in response to a
question of how to understand Turnitin's "similarity report".

Turnitin is *text matching software*. They offer a service based on the model
that plagiarism can come from copying text from another source (and hence
advertise as 'plagiarism detection software'). The expectation needs to be: the
similarity report shows instances where the text in this essay matches text from
another source and presents it as a sign of potential plagiarism. It is not a
report on parts of the essay that are plagiarised. And, importantly, plagiarism
through copying of concepts is not detected (nor those from contract-cheating
scenarios).

With that in mind, we can now see that if a class all submit essays that have a
cover sheet with the same class name, assignment name and lecturer stated then
Turnitin will 'see' a page of an assignment with text that matches the text in
another assignment submitted. It will then display it as such.

Likewise, if a student quotes the text of the NRSV then Turnitin will likely
present a match as an internet source or another assignment in its collection
will likely also contain that verse.

In your provided example, #3 and #2 are quoted and should therefore be
considered 'matching, but not plagiarism'. There is the option to turn off /
ignore quoted material (I checked the setting in ARK and this exclusion is not
in place for this assignment). This would remove the presentation of #3, #14,
#2, #5, #11, #15, #9, #4, #8, #20, #6, #12, #7, #19 (sorry I worked through the
paper to get this list).

You will note that there are no matches on the Bibliography page. This is due to
the option to exclude material in the bibliography being turned on (I checked
the assignment setting).

That leaves nos 10,13,16,17,18 - basically the footnoted material. It is likely
that Turnitin cannot 'see' that these are footnotes and sees them as just more
text on the page. (I'm not sure of this, but if the developers came from an APA
view of an essay, they would consider all text material up to the bibliography
as part of the text of the essay). The process of lecturer review would be to
scan these text matches and conclude that someone else has submitted work that
includes these citations in it and ignore them.

The text match in the second sentence - 16 words identical to another source -
raises a question. This same source also appears in 4th paragraph and the
footnotes. Is this plagiarism? It could be that 2 students sat in a class with
the same lecture material that referred to the same 3 authors or maybe there was
a bibliography given to students. The lecturer would know if this was the case.

If you scroll through the whole assignment, the 52% here looks (visually) to
mean "52% of the text in this essay matches other text that we have in our
database". The 16% - "16% of the text in this essay matches other text that we
have in this one source in our database".

To respond to the validity question - I think this is a reliable, valid
report... But the question is 'of what'? and the answer is 'of where the text in
this essay matches text in the database'.

To frame the discussion another way - a decent essay will quote sources that in
many cases will have been quoted before (or at least the sources themselves
referenced) and therefore we would expect matches to occur. The question then
becomes: which text matches are problematic? Hence, the report requires work to
interpret, but there are a couple of things that would help.

If this submitted essay had no coversheet and used an author-date format and we
turned off checking quoted text, we would only have a couple of sentences
highlighted. (we can't test this as a new submission would match this submission)

The options for excluding bibliography and quoted material are set on each
assignment in ARK. Knowing what these are set to helps interpretation. I would
recommend that coversheets not be used for online submissions - both ARK and
Turnitin know which student, assignment and class the submission is for.
"
